---
layout: post
title: My HTML Notes Part 7
tags:
- HTML
- Web Development
published: true
---

## Forms
### The ```<form>``` Element
HTML forms are used to collect user input. The ```<form>``` element defines an HTML form:

```html
<form>
.
form elements
.
</form>
```
HTML forms contain form elements. Form elements are different types of input elements, checkboxes, radio buttons, submit buttons, and more.

### The ```<input>``` Element
The ```<input>``` element is the most important form element. The ```<input>``` element has many variations, depending on the type attribute. Here are the types used in this chapter:

### Text Input

```html
<form>
First name:<br>
<input type="text" name="firstname">
<br>
Last name:<br>
<input type="text" name="lastname">
</form>
```

### Radio Button Input
Radio buttons let a user select ONE of a limited number of choices:

```html
<form>
<input type="radio" name="sex" value="male" checked>Male
<br>
<input type="radio" name="sex" value="female">Female
</form>
```

### The Submit Button
The form-handler is typically a server page with a script for processing input data. The form-handler is specified in the form's action attribute:

```html
<form action="action_page.php">
First name:<br>
<input type="text" name="firstname" value="Mickey">
<br>
Last name:<br>
<input type="text" name="lastname" value="Mouse">
<br><br>
<input type="submit" value="Submit">
</form>
```
### The Action Attribute
The action attribute defines the action to be performed when the form is submitted. The common way to submit a form to a server, is by using a submit button. Normally, the form is submitted to a web page on a web server. In the example above, a server-side script is specified to handle the submitted form:

```html
 <form action="action_page.php">
```

### The Method Attribute
The method attribute specifies the HTTP method (GET or POST) to be used when submitting the forms:

```html
<form action="action_page.php" method="GET">
<!-- or -->
<form action="action_page.php" method="POST">
```

You can use GET (the default method):

If the form submission is passive (like a search engine query), and without sensitive information. When you use GET, the form data will be visible in the page address:

> GET is best suited to short amounts of data. Size limitations are set in your browser.

You should use POST:

If the form is updating data, or includes sensitive information (password). POST offers better security because the submitted data is not visible in the page address.

### The Name Attribute
To be submitted correctly, each input field must have a name attribute. This example will only submit the "Last name" input field:

```html
<form action="action_page.php">
First name:<br>
<input type="text" value="Mickey">
<br>
Last name:<br>
<input type="text" name="lastname" value="Mouse">
<br><br>
<input type="submit" value="Submit">
</form>
```
